Session.
And we have, uh, haw space,
an emergency management joining us by Zoom.
And look, you are already there. Uh, good morning.
Thanks so much for joining us, uh, early this morning.
We really appreciate it. We do have a copy
of your Russian submission, uh,
and we've got 10 minutes for
your, uh, oral submission today. So over to you.
Thank you. Can you hear us okay?
Yes, you can. Thank you. Perfect. Thank you.
Good morning to the committee.
Uh, thank you Chair Les for having us this morning.
Uh, yes, I'm Sophie Sea Chair
of Hawkes Bay Civil Defense Emergency Emergency
Management Joint Committee.
I'm here on behalf of NAP Council Central Hawkes Bay
Hastings and White Oil Council,
and as chair of Hawkes Bay Regional Council.
And I'm introducing Shane Briggs, who's with us.
He's the director of Hawkes Bay Emergency Management
and ours group controller.
Yes, I know you've all read the submissions.
I'll race through the highlights.
Um, so there's room, uh, in time for questions.
Look, we are the region who lived through Cyclone Gabrielle,
and you'll realize that, uh, we've just been
through another weekend of wild We, that we are well aware
of the importance of this bill,
and we completely support the intent to modernize it.
But as the region that really saw the significant,
significant systematic issues, particularly around lack
of clarity of roles and responsibilities,
and as the region that has just adopted
and is implementing now the Civil Defense Emergency
Management Transformation Strategy, we are really committed
to ensuring that all aspects of this bill can be optimized.
First up, you will have heard it from lots
of people we know this funding, uh, the, that you,
you all know that the bill creates significant new
responsibilities for councils.
Good. We are really pleased about that.
So it should, we have
to be accountable and we need to do better.
But the price tag of 82 million
with no extra funding is gonna cause huge problems for us,
particularly in small regions.
I wanna give you an example
of our Central Hawkes Bay Council.
They are investing 400,000 in the 26th, 27 year just
to upgrade their own civil defense capacity.
That $400,000 is a 1.5% rate increase for that council.
I'd suggest that once we put these extra responsibilities in
there, they could well be up to a 4% rate rise under that.
Rates capping are just on civil defense, um, upgrade.
So we need to be really aware of that.
Uh, we really urge the committee to address the funding gap
or pipelines for funding
and consider having NEMA preparing these specific
implementation plans with realistic milestones
that we actually can meet Phase two,
our council funding cycles.
It's the way that we can actually plan
to be really successful in
implementation rather than failing.
Uh, and we need to align it, please,
with a little bit longer transition time.
We are thinking six to 12 months
with this clear implementation and plan
and funding it again, will make sure
that we can actually deliver on what's being asked of us.
Uh, second point, iwi Maori participation.
We wanna be really upfront.
Maori are our first responders in Hawkes Bay.
The 30% of our population, we have over 70 Mara over
during Cyclo Gabriel.
They were the first people, uh, uh, on the doorsteps
or on the rivers, taking people back to safe spaces.
We are asking them to help plan.
We're asking them to stand up in emergencies,
but we actually are denying the, once again,
a meaningful voice at our governance table.
We really encourage the committee to take note
of the 2016 tag review,
the 2023 ministerial inquiry,
and our own independent flood review of 24,
all which recommended iwi representation
on governance structures.
Alongside that, we must extend the civil liability
protection to those acting in good faith.
In those early, early stages, people are becoming more
and more frightened to act
because they're frightened of the liabilities.
And actually, those early responders are the
difference between life and death.
Uh, lead agency responsibilities.
Point three, you'll see that in our submission.
Look, the really limited these lead agency pieces
to the response phase only, it's actually inconsistent
with the bill's own purpose, which wants us
to cover the four R reduction
readiness, response and recovery.
That specialist hazard expertise is essential across all
phases, not just the emergency.
What happens if we are not working closely in the planning
stage is we become very segregated in the response phase.
Also in recovery during cyclone, uh, Gabrielle,
all those expertise in hydrology, geotech meteorology
were essential for months
and actually now still essential
to us three years after the event.
So, a really simple recommendation to amend Clause 69
and 83 to make sure lead agency has an expertise is embedded
right through the four Rs.
Please, um, look,
we're gonna speak a little bit more on our next submission
from Hawkes Bay Regional Council on alignment
with the parallel reforms,
but if we, I just touched on the rate capping as an example,
if we don't make sure we're aligned into the RM reforms
as well, we're gonna end up with them with some big holes.
Um, like as an example, a really obvious place is simply
to expand the definition of hazard
to include the effects of climate change.
Then it, it's gonna fit with our RN reforms
where that terms being used.
So we encourage some really careful
consideration across aligning with those other reforms.
And look, our last one, clarification by our group role,
really important during BAU
and I'll, I'll talk a little bit more about
that from Hasting,
from Brooks Bay Regional Council's role in the next
submission, our group managers, here's one right here,
they are our professional emergency management team.
They know what they're doing in this space.
We don't, we really wanna see clear definition
of the group role office
that's gonna help us lift standards.
And just to, to really make that understandable
when these guys can direct councils to develop plans
to do more training, to take more, um, scenarios.
They're uplifting the quality of us currently.
There's not real clear definition on what they can direct us
to or what they can require us to implement.
So we really wanna encourage you to, to re-look at that.
Thank you. I, I think I've done all right on time.
Uh, we, we do have a few minutes for questions.
And so what you'd like
to do is we'll do questions on the submission
and then move kind of formally to the next submission.
Is that, is that right? Yes. Yes. Okay, fantastic.
We've got a bit of a lineup for questions.
We'll start with Tim Costley.
Hey, thank you. Uh, I'll give you both upfront
and you can just answer them, uh, together.
Maybe one is, do you have clarity about where
responsibilities sit in line division of responsibilities
between your EOC and the EOC of St.
Napier City Council?
And then anything at a national level that happens,
is there clarity about the,
the overlap and that kind of thing?
And the second aspect is,
I heard your well articulated point about the funding
versus the responsibility.
Can you give us an example of the kind of things
that you have to spend, you know, they're up
to $2 million on that,
therefore contribute to that 4% rate rise.
Thank you. Mm-hmm.
Kiara, so just firstly on the between, uh,
operation centers at each response level, uh,
whilst there is clarity, uh,
I guess the hard part is when we talk about it being locally
led, regionally supported,
and nationally enabled, uh,
that can be quite challenging when resources need
to spread across multiple areas at some, uh,
so Wealthy Act does currently,
and the bill does provide, uh, some clarity.
There is operational
challenges in actually implementing that.
You want each region
or each council to be able
to lead the response in its own right.
Uh, but we also now need to make sure that, uh,
from a regional perspective, an initial perspective,
we can then coordinate across those boundaries as required.
Okay. Maybe hand the funding one. So
Funding to me?
Yeah. The, the funding, um,
I'll talk again a little bit in Hawkes Bay Regional Council
submission, but the Hawkes Bay Regional Council collects
rates on as the administrative body we use.
That's from, from our whole region.
We use that 2 million to fund our group Office
16 staff the planning
and coordination for REGIONWIDE events.
Each individual TA then is also building their own
individual team within councils
to respond to their local events.
So the 2 million funds, our group office,
and then, for example, central Hawke's value 400,000.
This year, Hastings is investing 1.2 million
into their internal team.
So that's how those funding pieces are split.
I'm not sure if I, I answered your question actually, Tim.
Yeah, because what I guess I'm trying
to do is what's the extra thing that this bill delivers
that will cost you extra money,
therefore pushes, right, sir.
I think if I can, yeah.
So as those, uh, things, if you think about extra standards
for long time, the sector has been asking
for clearer standards.
Uh, you know, it says, you know, be trained.
What does that mean? But that training comes with a cost.
I think last year alone, you know,
we paid $160,000 just in training, uh, uh, one shift
of people across councils.
Uh, when you think about the extra planning requirements,
the, the greater consultation requirements.
But also when we start thinking about risk reduction,
the cost, we need to spend the next place to actually, uh,
save money later during the response recovery.
All of those costs, uh,
will be greater than they're now and they need to be.
Mm-hmm. That's just how we fund that. Mm-hmm.
And estimated, um, by, by your review at 82 million
across all councils.
Thank you. We now have, um, finished the time
for the next, uh, moving on to the next, um, submission.
But I might just keep the,
I think the personnel will be similar in the next one,
so I'll just keep the questioning order.
So just, um, so you're aware,
we do have a few members wishing to ask questions
for this one, but we'll now move on
to the Haws Bay Regional Council.
Um, and we're joined by Katrina.
Yes. And Katrina. Oh, she is. Great. Hi. Morning Katrina.
Uh, I'm not gonna cover, um, I'm, I'm just gonna speak
to note the point, but I won't go through the details again.
So there's more time for questions.
But we are really clear also from a Cooks regional council,
this Iwi Maori participation at governance
is very important from that side as well.
And just a quick headline.
Uh, I dunno how, um,
how deeply you've been involved in emergency
management within councils.
To be really clear, the Hawkes Bay Regional Council collects
the regional rate that supports the group office.
The individual TA responses
that responsibility lies within our TAs,
and we govern the group office at this joint committee level
between the four and myself.
So there's two points, separate pieces.
That's why we've, we've ended up in two submissions.
Um, funding, again, already spoken to that,
but I make the point that we have invested another 875,000
over the last two years on top of what we've already done
to, to grow that group capacity.
That was 1% over the on top of rates, uh,
rate increases year on year from 24 25, 25, 26.
Um, we, I, I touched on the group office.
I don't think I'm gonna go over that again.
Um, we really care from a regional council point of view
that we understand our role in emergency, which is
to provide the intel into our group office on river levels,
um, flood warnings, et cetera.
We feed the intel into the group office office for that.
We wanna make the point, this essential infrastructure,
the bill explicitly needs to include river management,
flood protection, regional airports.
We've got a few more in our builder as well
that gives us the ability from, uh, a regional council point
of view to be working
as an essential infrastructure provider.
So that's really important to us.
Uh, I'm gonna ask Katrina to speak briefly on the,
um, parallel forms.
Katrina Bunton is our general manager of policy regulation
and, um, consenting,
and she's really all over all of the bills.
And this is an important piece for us to,
to get across about how these are gonna interact
and how they could affect, uh,
emergency management. Thanks, Katrina.
Thank you. Good morning panel.
And thank you for hearing us this morning.
Uh, can you hear me okay?
We Can, yep. Perfect. Thank you.
Um, look, our submission lays it out pretty clearly,
but just high level points for you to take away.
Uh, we, we submit
that the emergency management bill must be aligned with all
of the other parallel reforms that are ongoing currently,
such as the resource management reform, water services,
local government funding.
You've heard about the rates cap
and the impact that's likely
to have on funding emergency management res, uh,
bill Implica, uh, implementation,
and, uh, really importantly, the climate adaptation policy.
So there's, um, absolutely, uh,
a significant weighting towards the res, uh, the response
and recovery elements in the emergency management bill.
But ultimately, if we want to lessen the time
that we spend on response
and recovery, it's really, really important
that we focus on the first two hours.
I'm sure you're gonna hear this a lot today
about readiness and resilience.
Uh, certainly the emergency management bill doesn't connect
in with the climate adaptation policies
that currently are being, uh, reformed through government.
Uh, nor does it connect in
to the resource management reforms,
which are requiring regional councils to identify, uh,
and through spatial planning plan for, uh, hazards,
but then not creating a connection
or a direction through the emergency management bill
to address those in order to minimize
or reduce the incidents of emergencies that we are having
through the water standards bill, which I've had a lot
of involvement in, uh,
and stormwater standards We can see across the country
and in Hawke's Bay, uh,
where communities are constantly being flooded, not
by rivers, but by underperforming stormwater systems.
Um, and there's no direction
or connection between the stormwater standards bill,
the emergency management bill, and the RN reform.
And all of that needs to come together very, very coherently
into, I would suggest spatial planning
and the new emergency, uh, sorry, environment, uh,
plans that we need to create.
Uh, so it's just that connection that's missing.
All of the pieces are essentially there.
There's a lack of connection there.
Thanks, Katrina. Uh, I'm gonna leave the rest
of my submission there.
I covered most of it in the early piece,
and that gives us five minutes for questions.
Fantastic. Thank you so much for that.
I'll go to, uh, Melissa. Melissa. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The question that I had was actually from the previous
submission from the Hawkes Bay Defense Emergency, uh,
management group, where you actually talked about people
were, uh, reticent to actually participate
because of the, uh, i, I,
I can't remember the exact word you used,
but it was, it was about, uh, liability.
Can you actually give us an example as to, uh, how
that actually transpired with, with the flooding
and the emergency that you've had?
Very simply, um, is, uh, early responders,
there was simply no, um, ability
to claim back money from Nima.
So in the case of, uh, in a, a helicopter,
in one case in food delivery, they acted
before they had had official, um, uh, official approval,
uh, to get food in or to do whatever they were doing,
and we simply weren't able to claim.
So we have a number of claims that NEMA were unwilling to,
uh, respond to or, or, um, I'm sorry, reimburse simply
because it was before there was an emergency declared, or
before formal structures had taken place.
So the, so there is delay
because of those kinds of issues, which can actually,
you know, um, put people in danger.
Is that what you're saying? Yes.
Yeah. Simply extending civil liability
so we know we can act
and that there'll be support both, um, personally
for action or for costing. Good. Yeah.
Thank you. Q, Andy Foster.
Yeah, I think we heard that,
um, from one of the vets, didn't we?
A helicopter and Yeah. Incurred quite significant cost.
Look, thank you. I really music to my ears, uh, to hear.
Um, Katrina, you talking about the link, um, with, um,
land use and spatial planning. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Um, Which seems to me like a no brainer,
but are there some things that we can do,
and this is a question I keep asking NEMA as well.
Um, that's not our responsibility,
but other things we can do to actually say it
is NMAs responsibility.
It is the emergency manage group
management group's responsibility.
'cause I mean, um, uh, you, you've got responsibility there,
Sophie, for a lot of resource management planning as well
as respons as an individual in your role, as well
as emergency planning.
If we can link those better Yes.
Surely that puts us in a better place to, um, to have a,
a more resilient, um, system
that we're not actually cleaning up
quite as much of a mess afterwards.
That's correct. If I can speak to that, I think that
what we've got is, as I said, all of the component parts
and each of your pieces of legislation.
Uh, but they're not connecting.
And we are treating the system as silos.
Uh, and what I've learned very clearly from my time
of leading, uh, the group office, um,
or just as administering authority, it is a system.
And if we continue to say, well, your responsibility is just
for this part, and our responsibility for that part,
and there's no direction, uh, to then prepare for
that readiness and resilience piece,
then it never actually connects.
Now at Hawke's Bay Regional Council, uh, we are beginning
to do that a lot more.
One, as a result of Cyclone Gabriel
and some really good independent reviews that have told us
how to do some stuff better.
But also, uh, there's real strong connection
through the group management level, which is me.
So I'm responsible for not only spatial planning,
transportation, three waters in terms of my connection
with tutor kaka,
but also for civil defense emergency management.
And when you have all those pieces coming together, uh,
then, then you can make it work.
But there is simply no direction
in an emergency management bill to say, uh, you must direct,
for example, a territorial
or local authority to, uh, create resilience
in their stormwater network,
and then link that through
to stormwater standards in the stormwater,
uh, in the three waters.
Uh, and I, I apologize. Uh, water's done well.
Better waters. I always, okay. We
Know what you're talking about. Yeah,
I do. Thank you. Um,
and so that's where that link is.
And I, I get that the stormwater standards are
yet to be created.
So now is a really good time to be thinking about
what does resilience in our stormwater network look like.
So just final question there.
Um, when we talk about this, a responsibility
to have an emergency management plan, it will be,
and to develop that, it'll be really useful
to have something explicit in there,
which talks about those kind of standards, those kind
of spatial, uh, land use, uh, issues, that,
that is also part of a plan.
'cause at the moment, it's seems a bit silent.
That's right. Minister. I think that, um, certainly
through, if you're going to, to get a whole region
to do a spatial plan,
and then environment plans, absolutely.
Having a connection into your emergency management plans
that says, okay, TLAs, based on the spatial plan
and the hazards that you know, exist, what are you doing
in terms of creating resilience for your community
and linking that into the EM bill.
Very helpful. Thank you. Thank you.
We, we are, um, outta time now,
but we've just got, um, a final question from Luga
who was actually waiting for the first submission.
So we just, hopefully you'll just
be able to answer this really quickly. Thanks,
Madam Chair. Really quickly,
so you've talked about the systems,
you've talked about bills need to come together.
I'm just noting you are in the earliest submission
around group manager roles
and how CEEs have to just kick in.
Um, so, so my question is just very quickly, you've got,
if you get the wording right,
you've gotta get the people right in the roles.
Yes. Yeah. Okay. That's good.
That's a very, um, quick answer. Absolutely.
Thank you so much for your time this morning.
That, uh, that's a marathon effort
to do, um, 20 minutes on this.
But we really appreciate your expertise.
We see the work, um, that you've all done, uh,
together on looking at emergency management term.
We've made a lot of notes, um, from the comments
that you've made, um, in both submissions.
So thank you all for joining us today.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Our next, uh, submitters are Hor St.
John, who I understand with us by Zoom.
Welcome, great to see you.
Uh, we've received a copy of your,
I think you might still be on mute,
but we've received your copy of, uh,
your written submission.
And, uh, we've got 10 minutes
to hear from you from your oral submission.
Uh, so you're welcome to use that time.
We'll leave some time for questions at the end if members
are quite keen to ask questions on this bill.
So, um, but I'll leave that to you.
Uh, thank you very much for that.
And thanks for the opportunity to, uh,
provide an oral submission
to support our written submission.
Um, St.
John Ambulances have been operating for 140 years, uh,
across and, um, providing, uh, emergency management services
and emergency care to, uh,
over three quarter million people each year
alongside ton free ambulance.
Um, we also respond to tens of thousands
of calls alongside our New Zealand police, colleagues
and defense colleagues.
Uh, we've been advocating for over a decade to be recognized
as an emergency service and recognized within the, um,
legislative framework.
And so we really welcome the opportunity
to now hopefully finally get
that recognition that we deserve.
Um, we, we do provide an, uh,
an amazing service across the country.
As you're aware, we're in every community, um,
and we provide vital, uh, emergency services, uh,
particularly, uh, uh, during crises and, uh, major instance.
And there are many, many examples of, uh, the services we
provided alongside colleagues over the past, uh, 140 years.
Um, I'd like to hand across to, uh, my colleague, uh,
general Manager of operations, Doug Gallagher, um, to,
to give some specific examples of where the legislation
and where the e emergency services, um,
legislative framework, uh, has, has really disadvantaged
to hat and John, uh, but also meant that we've
provided some optimal ability to, um, coordinate,
measure incidents, uh, across to you, Doug. Thank you.
Um, thank you, Peter. Yeah, uh, look, recent, um,
some recent events really underscore, um, the vital role
that emergency ambulance services play in, um,
emergency management, um, including the Port Hill fires, um,
the CCA eruptions significant weather events such as, um,
such as Gabriel, um, during Cyclone Gabriel, um, res the,
the Cyclone Gabriel response.
Um, our managers were excluded from an emergency operations
center, um, especially in the early stages,
um, of that incident.
Um, during the West Coast response to Cyclone Gita, again,
our managers were specifically excluded from the EOC
and advised that health, um,
were the emergency service rather than ambulance.
Um, at the Kaikoura, um, earthquake response,
our manager was sent away from the EOC,
put in a room on his own and relied on briefings
after, um, the main briefings.
And we see differing approaches by emergency management, um,
coordinating executive groups, kegs, um, some including us,
some not, um, in those, um, you know,
which is about the reduction in readiness phases.
Um, so we re we really do rely on briefings and,
and intelligence sharing.
Um, yet ironically, um, um, we are quite Intel rich, and,
and we were the first, um, organization to inform NEMA
of the recent landslide occurring at Mount Moni.
Um, so look, Han, um,
really welcomes the introduction
of this emergency management bill.
Um, in particular, we'd like to highlight, um,
our strong support for the inclusion
of emergency ambulance services within the statutory
definition of, um, emergency service, um, our,
our strong support, um, for including the chief executive,
um, or a senior officer
of an emergency ambulance service operating in the area, um,
as a member of each emergency management, um,
coordinating executive group.
So, in summary, um, we support the overall intent
of the bill, um,
and welcome the progress
that represents in strengthening New Zealand's
emergency management framework.
And we are particularly pleased, um, to see this coming
to fruition, um,
after around 10 years of sustained advocacy, um, that,
that's reflected through here.
So we are really pleased with, um,
where this is landing. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Um,
and thanks for all your work as well,
and to acknowledging your recent, uh, work, um,
and mount long as well.
That's, um, obviously at the top
of our minds at the moment in the committee.
Uh, I do have some questions around, uh,
so kind of two questions.
I know that, that you've suggested a slight change
to the definition in your written submission,
so I just wanted to know, um, uh, if you wanted to expand on
that in terms of the ambulance service, uh,
and how that, uh, whether that's a likely thing to occur,
that there'd be kind of non-official,
almost ambulance services who might, um, be participating.
So that, that'll be really good to know.
The other thing is, um, with some of the issues
that you've raised in terms of participating in the
keg discussions, do you think this bill adequately addresses
the issues that you've had in the past that, uh,
have been raised in previous reviews, uh, so
that you're not in that situation situation again?
Yeah. Thank you. Look, um, to your first question.
Um, while, while we are one of two, um, crown, um,
contracted emergency ambulance service providers in
New Zealand, the other being Wellington free,
there are a range of private ambulance services who, um,
participate in, um, non-emergency ambulance service work.
So covering events, um, special events
and, um, into hospital transfers and, and, and,
and that type of work.
So, um, we specifically, um, feel
that it's the emergency ambulance service providers at,
you know, um, Wellington free and, and, um, Han St.
John, um, that should be included, um, under the definition
of, uh, of, um, ambulance service. And
We're the only ones who actually receive
an answer one-on-one calls.
Thank you. That, that's really clear.
Thank you for that suggestion. Yeah.
And, and the second part of your question, yes, we,
we feel that, um, the bill, uh,
in its present state does cover, um, um, what we,
um, where we feel things, um, need to land in, in terms
of learning from the past and so on.
Thank you so much. Uh,
we do have some, a couple of other questions. My
Question was exactly yours on the,
Okay. Fantastic. Thank
you. Thank you, Celia.
We'll go to, uh, ed Foster
Look, um, thank you from me as well for the, uh,
the fantastic work that you do.
Um, just wanted the,
the point you make about being included in the, um,
the emergency management, um, group.
Is there any other organizations who also have the same,
they're knocking on the door from the outside
and they would like to be part of it, but aren't
It possibly might be, but I think, I think what we,
what we would say is that it, it's a bit
of a nonsense that we have.
Uh, and we can, and Doug's given some examples.
There are many more during COVID as well, where, um,
you got ambulance, the three emergency services
to the services are seen around the table, uh,
but the ambulance services excluded.
I mean, it's a complete nonsense. Um,
so clearly there are a range of organizations
that are involved in emergency management,
and probably not for us to comment on where that, where,
where the line is drawn.
But certainly the emergency ambulance service has to be
around the table, has to be included, has to be recognized
by local authorities, um, if we're to provide a,
an optimal response and coordination during major incidents.
Yeah, no, thank you for that.
I'm quite shocked that you're not.
And look, the other question I had is just under the, um,
definition of an emergency, you want,
you wanna include major, um, transport incidents.
I just wanted, could you just talk us through that?
Because most of those major
transport incidents probably don't.
They, they don't see the standing up of a, in generally a,
a whole range of different entities as a, you know, as a,
maybe a major weather or earthquake
or whatever else, um, event might,
what's you thinking around that?
Yeah, specifically we are thinking, um, uh,
disaster level transport incidents such as, um, a,
a airplane crash, um, train crash,
um, that type of incident.
And that would be an incident which would, would end up
with an emergency management center being set up
for that. Yes.
Yep. Yeah. So, so it's in that, it, so it's that kind
of circumstance you're talking about where,
where the emergency resources are being stood up.
It's not simply having, say, police and NZTA and,
and yourselves and fire going to a, a,
a traffic major, traffic incidents.
Oh, no, we're talking, as Doug said, we're talking major,
a major sort of transport incident.
Uh, either a plane crash
or perhaps a train crash where the, where prolonged,
you know, entrapments higher, uh, hazardous materials.
So where this really has got a, a more, you know,
it does require that, uh, fully, fully coordinated response.
Okay. That's helpful. Thank you.
So I, I understand that, Peter,
but it's, uh, under the act, either, either
that the act is triggered or it's not.
So surely if, if we get to the point that,
that we're triggering a emergency response under the act,
then you would be included.
And if we are not, if for some reason there's a train crash
to take one of the samples,
but we are not using the, um, emergency Management Act,
then us rising in a train crash
to here will make no difference.
Because if we're not using the act,
that doesn't get you a seat at the table
Minister. I, I think, I think, yeah,
that, that, um, is,
is would be our interpretation as well.
So I think, um, it, it, it's somewhat a moot point.
Um, it's just that where the, um,
where the discussion has been in the past around, um, uh,
the definition, um, I guess where, and,
and we see, um, that these large transport incidents, um,
sometimes involving terrorism, um, from overseas, um,
it's vital that, um, that, that we're included at the table
And, and that makes sense.
But have there been any in New Zealand where, uh, it's hard
to think that the ambulance responding to a major
accident would not be included, but, but,
but I, I could be wrong. So
No, no, we don't have any, um, any history here.
It's, it's from what we've,
we've learned from overseas, and it's
More for completeness, just so we,
we don't leave any loose ends or, or loopholes. That's all.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay, final question, Celia.
Thank you. Um, just following on from the issue of
what gets included and what doesn't.
Um, I was on the Kataki ferry when it losts power,
so pres, presumably that's the kind of incident
that you would expect,
but surely, um, a ferry like that, actually,
if it had ended up on the south coast of Wellington,
I'm sure the mayor of Wellington would've had
to have declared the state of emergency
and Wellington free in this case,
'cause of where it would be, would've been involved.
So I'm just not, I understand
that you should be involved in, in those sorts of incidents,
but as, um, my colleague said, once the act is triggered,
you know, once there's an emergency declared,
surely you would be,
Be, yeah, that's quite correct.
Would agree with you.
Thank you. Thank you, thank you so much.
We've now run out of time. Thank you very much
for joining us today and of the work that you continue
to do, uh, in this space.
Really appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you.
Our next submitter, I think we have online already,
which is Canterbury Regional Council or Canterbury.
Good morning. Uh, good morning, Madam Chair. How are you?
I'm very, I'm well, thank you.
And I'm just, uh, thinking of your, your region, um,
obviously with, um, the recent instance there.
So, um, very grateful that you're able to, to join us, uh,
today and, and give us some
of your time when you're obviously dealing with, uh, a lot
of, um, issues and, and Canterbury at the moment.
So, uh, just thoughts are with you at this time.
We've, we've received your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to to hear from you today
and your oral submission as well over to you.
Excellent. Yeah. Uh, thank you. And, um, as,
as you've just pointed out, uh, the first thing I wanted
to do was, um, it was quite timely to do the submission
as we do have a state of emergency within our region
and banks peninsula at the moment.
And I just want to make acknowledgement to all
of the emergency services who are working in
that space at the moment, and to the people
who are suffering those floods and,
and right across the country as well.
We're, we're seeing more weather events.
Uh, so this bill is quite timely to be discussing this.
Uh, and so we, we as on a whole support the intent
of the bill, um, without funding
to support local government, uh,
to meet the obligations under the bill, though
implementation is likely to be inconsistent across the
regions, which is set out in our, uh, submission
and a key aim for emergency management reform potentially
may not be, uh, achieved.
One of the main points that I just wanted to touch on was
that flood protection infrastructure should be recognized
as an essential, uh,
infrastructure in schedule three from enactment.
Uh, and we're seeing that coming through today, uh, with
what we're seeing in banks Peninsula.
And you would've seen Hawke's Bay was on earlier.
Uh, some of their flood infrastructure is absolutely vital
to, uh, to the protection of people.
Um, one of the other key submission points was
that Bill needs to require meaningful place-based engagement
in collaboration with ua.
Uh, and as I said, we in, we support the intent of the bill.
That's not transformational,
but it is a step into the right direction to, uh, to start,
um, addressing some of the key issues.
Now beside me here, I have, uh, councilor John Sunol,
who is our main person who deals with, uh, civil defense,
uh, and is also the deputy chair of our civil defense for,
uh, Canterbury Region.
So I'll pass it over to him
to go into more detail of our submission.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit.
Um, as Dion has, has highlighted, we, we absolutely support,
uh, the, the drive to,
to have uplift within emergency management,
but we do have some questions as to, uh, how the,
the bill comes together and,
and some of the challenges we see on the strengthening
of the role of iwi Maori within the Canterbury Group,
which will become a emergency management committee.
We have who sitting at the table,
and we treat them as an equal partner.
Uh, if there is any vote, we, we just treat the equality.
So our expectation in the bill would be that iwi Maori, um,
have an equal place in a voting right at the table, that
that's something that we see as important.
Uh, we recognize the challenges of somewhere
around Lake Tpo, east Coast, north Island,
where you may have 30
or 40 different hapu wanting representation.
But, uh, my belief, our belief is that, uh,
they should have equal opportunity
and voting rights at those tables, so, so strongly support
that, uh, we, we strongly support the strengthening of, of,
of communities and their roles.
And again, we within Canterbury have had a rural group, uh,
sitting at keg and conversations at, at a group level and,
and accept that the question that we possibly raise is,
it's, it's a broad statement to say, bring the community in.
And, and some of those communities
that are somewhat disadvantaged, a a little more thought
around a definition iteration conversation as to
what that might look like.
Uh, we don't believe it needs to be prescriptive,
but just a wee bit of a conversation
and some guidance as to, to
what those communities may look like.
It says a a very, very broad statement,
but different communities will have, uh, different areas
where they do see some disadvantage.
And again, um, somewhere like Canterbury,
who represents the rural community,
when we probably have the largest land area as,
as a region within New Zealand.
So just some, some, some clarification there would be,
would be useful if we move to the responsibilities, uh,
national, regional, and local levels.
We would like to see some clarification of the role between,
uh, the leads, uh, in events.
And we'll use fire service as, as an option.
Uh, fire come in, they,
they take control in the lead of a fire event.
But as that event dissipates and the roles
and responsibilities potentially change, um, we don't see a,
a decent conversation around
how transition will will happen.
We recognize that that's, uh, in the bill,
but as we evacuate people, as there are a whole bunch
of social and other things happening on the side,
where does the balance of lead of a, of a,
of an entity fighting a fire
and those greater responsibilities for community sit?
And so what's the relationship
between the regional controller
who has those statutory responsibilities,
but maybe not the lead because of lead?
And then again, we would like to see some clarification
around the transfer process, having,
having a process in place.
I think there's, uh, there's a potential for opportunity
for a lead agency to potentially continue too long,
which can at times hinder recovery
or a transition into some of those other responsibilities
that sit there in the wider community.
So, again, a a little more clarification
and some thought about processes and in the transition,
or if, uh, we have multi-event or,
or challenges sitting there, a lead agency, um,
may not have responsibilities
or will not have responsibilities for, for recovery.
And recovery for us starts almost at the beginning
of a response and thought going into
what does the future look like?
So again, just some of those conversations.
Um, moving on. Um, Dion has touched on, uh,
flood telemetry, rain gauges, uh, infrastructure stop banks
and the like, we, we absolutely believe that
that should sit in, in schedule three, particularly
for us in Canterbury, a lot of effort
and thought goes into, uh, fast moving goods, fuel, uh,
access to hospitals, a whole bunch of things.
But literally, if the bridges are out,
how do we transfer people a, across a region to those,
those tertiary entities, whether it be
for food supply hospitals, all the like, so, uh,
we have a very strong expectation that they will be added.
And a question that has arisen from the 10 years
of my involvement, cell towers, uh,
the Hanoi Kaikora cell towers
and communication were an issue 10 years ago.
Uh, absolutely.
And Gabrielle, again, just in the rainfall event
that we have had here, um, the connectivity, the loss
of telemetry, the loss of connection, um, we know
that we have written to,
to minister Goldsmith on this matter.
And I think it's a conversation that we will continue
to have with, with, with other ministers.
But there's a significant issue around cell towers.
We cannot resilience.
We cannot get our telemetry,
our infrastructure working well if,
if those things are not in place.
So we would like
to see those considerations in in schedule three.
And, um, last point, really around recovery.
Um, it's a bit of a dark space.
Um, we all get into, uh, response.
We, we get into preparation, a whole bunch of things,
but there are some real questions around recovery.
And I don't believe
that we have looked at it well enough in the,
in the new bill, as I said,
if a major event happens in Canterbury,
our recovery manager is there from the get go thinking about
what the future is.
There will have been some planning into what might happen,
but we have a very short period of time with that manager,
uh, recovery manager has a, has a role within that,
that space of transition.
And then what does it look like going forward?
As we're all aware, a bunch of these events could be months,
years, uh, in recovery.
So how do we extend some of the powers?
How do we have a, a smooth transition from the initial
thinking of recovery into whatever entity
or agency then takes control.
And I think we, we saw in Gabrielle
and other places, just who then takes control of recovery,
uh, is critically important.
And there have been those challenges of, of
who takes control.
So again, we would like a wee bit more thought into
extending the roles or thinking about the roles
of recovery managers for, uh, I, I guess a true
and just transition to ensure that the things that need
to happen happen seamlessly.
And the last point, funding, uh, how do we interact
with the broader reforms?
Where do our science team sit within the simplification
of local government, uh, environment?
Canterbury has 160 200 staff down
to work within our justice precinct,
within our, our regional team.
So a manning into the future,
what do those people look like?
Where do they come from if, uh, within the simplification
of local government, we, we lose a bunch of those resources.
So there are some wider questions just sitting in there
about the assumptions made of the role of regions
with the conversation
for simplification of local government.
I'll leave it there and give you a little
time for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. We do have some questions.
I'll start with Andy Foster. Look, thanks.
And I'd lovely to see you both, uh, Dion and John. Um,
Too, Question in two parts.
Um, the comment you made about cell phones
and also about stock banks is just the, the way in which we,
uh, plan for resilient infrastructure,
critical infrastructure, lifelines, et cetera.
Do you think that's strong enough, um, in the,
the bill at the moment or needs?
My belief is, is not, And I just,
I reference the, um, the release of the infrastructure work,
uh, just yesterday.
It is pleasing to see that, that that river's infrastructure
and the like is, is noted.
But again, it is well down the list.
And so I just, I, I genuinely ask the question,
if we do not have resilience in our rivers and systems,
and you can look at Auckland
and the floods, you look at Gabrielle, you look at roa,
you look at Canterbury, they are a significant issue in
these events that, that go forward.
So we would like to see that elevation.
I also, I also Think, oh, go on. Sorry.
Just on the cell phone towers.
I mean, one of the issues is they're becoming
so much more critical in our lifelines at the moment that,
um, that for telemetry, for getting information to people so
that they understand when they need to move,
when they need to do things.
Right now we're facing a situation in banks Peninsula
where those cell phone towers have failed.
Uh, and we haven't got our telemetry to be able
to feed into the system, which is critical
to be able to make decisions.
So decision points aren't being able to be made
because critical infrastructure, well,
it's not called critical infrastructure in the,
in emergency management yet,
but what we're saying is it should be
because it is actually part
of the decision points in a modern
society that we've got now.
So that's the point that we're trying to get home there. So
Just to finish off that, do you have engagement with, uh,
the providers, whether it's, whether it's, you know,
telecommunications or roads or whatever?
Um, yep. And,
and how are they responding to, if you were saying, Hey,
well we, we are concerned about the, the resilience,
the robustness of that infrastructure, um, so
that you've got a more robust
before you have an event rather than it failing during
Th the, they, they're, it's, it's okay,
but in, in the disaster situation
or in the situation we're facing right now, some
of the communications that I've seen are quite bluntly
disa disappointing.
Uh, which means that we're not getting the critical, um,
the, the critical need, uh,
into our communities at the moment, which is,
which is an issue that we're gonna be
raising in the next few weeks.
And if I think about some
of the events in Canterbury Rivers, um, where Bridges,
roads, rail, uh, telecommunications taken out,
the response is, in a sense, it is your responsibility
to maintain the rivers.
It's not our responsibility to maintain our roads.
So I think there is a wee bit of a loss of connection,
of funding, of ability to, to maintain those,
those other core services.
Thank you. Thank You. Um, we, we have, um, now run out
of time, but we do have a final question from Celia Wade
Brown, if you, if you have a couple of minutes, um, just
to answer her question. Thank
You. Um,
greetings. Um, and it's really a question to Chair Dion.
Um, what would your funding priorities be
for readiness
and recovery, given we are having these increasingly severe
climate charged events?
And do you think that the new parameters
of most cost effective, um, could prevent
your choices being as resilient as they should be,
even if they reduce future costs
for recovery? So what, how would you,
I mean, one of the things, one of the things that I think,
um, there's a, there's a lot in that,
but I'll just go for one issue for that We're over top
of which is river resilience
and the planning for river resilience.
Now, if you look at the before the deluge work that, uh,
te du Ka is doing that I'm getting working with, um, um,
who's the chair of Greater Wellington, Darren Ponta, uh,
we're trying to get that money to be more streamlined,
put into budgets at your level, uh, so that that pipeline
of work is guaranteed.
You can get contractors up and running, planning up
and running, so that you've just got a continuous amount
of work that's happening within that river resilience
so that it's not ad hoc.
'cause ad hoc creates gaps
and gaps is where you see, where,
where nature will always take over.
Uh, so if we can get continuous program in the planning into
the funding into this river resilience, uh, you'll start
to see the benefits at the other end.
Now, that's only one space.
Uh, there's a whole lot more that I could talk about, but
That is a big one. Good example.
A great example. Thank you. Thank you so much.
You've been very generous with your time, um,
and your expertise, especially dealing with, um,
that emergency situation, um, in Port Hills at the moment.
So our thoughts, uh, with you
and hopefully, um, be able to move out of that state
of emergency, um, soon.
Thank you very much. Damage as possible.
So thank you so much for joining us. We really appreciate.